Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee.
I'm very happy to have with me today in the studio one of the finest members of the United
States Senate.
Man who works hard for progressive legislation who is effective in his presentation of
legislative proposals and of his viewpoint.
He has been to Tennessee on many occasions and we consider him one of our Tennessee's
and best friends and I think one of the very ableist members of the Senate, Wayne Morris
of Oregon, it certainly is good to have you with us.
Well, that's just very kind to let me visit with you and your constituents on this program.
You can close your ears for just a moment because I know you're a modest man but I want
to say to your constituents it's a privilege to work with us this keyfawper in the Senate
and I want to thank him and view of his constituents for the wonderful help he was to me a few
days ago as we carried through the Senate by a vote of 49 to 34, the federal aid education
bill.
As to his keyfawper was a great help to me.
It's a bill that's going to be of great help to Tennessee because you're going to get
a substantial contribution from the federal government to be of assistance in your schools
but with complete state control of the expenditure of the money.
Well Wayne, thank you very much for your nice remarks.
We've been mighty thoughtful going around to Knoxville and other places in Tennessee
making speeches to our people on several occasions.
Senator Morris is a member of the Labor and Public Works Committee and is chairman of the
Education Subcommittee and I think one of the best legislative handling of a bill that
I have seen but ever since I've been in the United States Senate, why is the remarkable
way that he steered the education bill through the United States Senate recently without
any crippling amendments involving either race or religion got through a fine clean
bill which is now in the House of Representatives.
This bill I believe provides $850 million a year for school construction and to supplement
teachers salaries over a three year period.
Is that right?
Yes, this is an $850 million per year bill and it's a trial bill for three years or
a triad for three years.
I'm satisfied that after three years the American people will insist that it be continued.
But you know as to say the fear argument that's been used for so long against federal aid
to education is that you can't have federal contributions to the states without the federal
government somehow dominating education.
Now there's no basis in that argument but as long as the fear exists you got to face
up to the fear.
So we have passed a bill that's for a three year trial period.
It is a bill that has an equalization formula in it which simply means that the states that
need the money the most will get the larger share of the money and why do we put it on
that basis because we take the possession that every boy and girl in this country is entitled
to an equal chance to develop his or her intellectual power and that's in the national interest
and that's where the national interest comes in.
Now how do we protect the states?
We protect the states by making it perfectly clear in the bill that the money goes to the
states is co-mingled with state educational funds is spent by the states in the cardinance
with state educational policy.
Now I've been in this struggle for many many years in the Senate.
I've been in the Senate now going on 17 years.
I was a co-sponsor of the Taff Bill in 47 of the Taff Thompson Bill in 49.
We passed both of those through the Senate.
I've introduced these bills year after year since I've been in the Senate and last year
we passed what is known as Senate Bill number eight.
It is almost identical with the bill that we just passed the other day in the Senate.
I want to make one more point.
I don't want to make a speech as this one.
You are doing fine with the statement.
I want to tell you people in Tennessee are very much interested in this bill and I think
the great majority of people realize that we need it in Tennessee that will make available
23 million five hundred thousand dollars for school construction and to supplement teacher
salvers in the next fiscal year in Tennessee.
And now?
So you're making a fine speech.
You go right on that one.
Not only covers school construction and teach your salaries but you can also use it for any
other educational purpose in public, elementary and secondary schools.
For example, if you need to use it for equipment in your physics and chemistry laboratories
it can be used for that purpose too.
We leave that decision up to you at the state.
But let me point out that I think the argument that helped us defeat those that keep stirring
up opposition to federal aid to education with the false charge that it will lead to federal
domination of schools is we pointed out that one third of the children in secondary and
elementary schools in the country have been getting federal aid for 10 years and to the
tune of two billions of dollars.
All of us as taxpayers have contributed to about a third of the public school population
in this country and elementary and secondary schools, two billion dollars.
Under what is known is public law 8, 7, 4 and 8, 1, 5.
Those are the two bills that cover the so-called federally impacted areas of the country
where the federal government has an atomic energy plant or a military reservation or some
other federal installation that brings in many families working for the federal government
with many children.
And then we have spent since said-
In that connection we have a great many military installations in Tennessee, Oak Ridge,
Tallahoma, Ploy.
Yes.
And may I say that the Senator Keefe offer was on the ball so to speak because the original
bill that came before us and I had the- it's always unpleasant when you have to disagree
with your administration.
I had the unpleasant task of informing the administration that we would not accept that section of the
original proposal of the administration bill that sought to cut back drastically on
these school districts that are now receiving federal funds in the federally impacted areas.
18 senators and your senator was one of them.
18 senators that called our attention to the fact that it would do a great injustice
to their states.
So we struck that from the bill and we continue under this bill to provide this federal
money for these federally impacted school districts.
But then I want to take you back to 1863.
In 1863 the moral act was signed which provided federal aids to every land grant college in
America.
You people in Tennessee have been the beneficiaries of that to the tune of tens upon tens of thousands
of dollars to your land grant colleges as there's every other state.
And then we've had a whole series of other special forms of aid to the schools of the country
for years.
So what we have there is school lunch program is another example of it.
So we just we just rode on this argument so to speak and the Senate once it got the facts
saw that there was no basis in fact for the argument that our bill would jeopardize local
control of education.
I'm proud of this bill.
I'm proud of the wonderful support that we got for our bill and I again want to thank
Senator Keifal for for his help.
Well I was a great legislative achievement and you were the generalist of the moral guiding
us in the Senate and I have a feeling that such a good record was made and your arguments
were so persuasive and favor of this bill that we have the best chance of getting a bill
through the House of Representatives we've had in many many years.
How do you feel about that?
Well I'm very hopeful that we can get it through the House and if the people listening to this
telecast want to help the school boys and girls of this country see to it that your
House of Representatives know your views on it because I close my comment of this education
bill with a truism I'd have you never forget.
I consider this bill a great defense measure because as I've said so many times but we'll
keep right on saying it until all the American people recognize it's truth.
We just can't keep ahead of Russia in manpower but we Americans better see to it that we
keep ahead of Russia in brain power and that's why we need this federal aid to education
bill to help you people in the States meet your educational responsibilities because how
you doing it now you're doing it by overtaxing your real property and the many of taxpayers
listening to me who owns real property knows how right I am.
We've already increased the taxes on real property to support our schools far below
beyond the rule of fairness and it's about time that we get some tax help from the federal
government that will help the local taxpayer meet the school expenses of this district.
Well I wish we could go on about the education bill because it is so very important for all
of us and we're certainly going to work hard to do what we can to get it through the House
of Representatives and I hope that anyone interested may be in touch with our congressmen.
But you know Senator Morris is a distinguished and has been for some time a member of the Foreign
Relations Committee and as such he is the chairman of the Latin American subcommittee.
In addition to this he has was the member of the United States delegation to the 15th
General Assembly of the United Nations.
We're all interested way in and don't have the benefit of hearing the executive testimony
before the Foreign Relations Committee and how we stand and Latin America and what can
we do to restore our prestige and get in better shape with our new births to the south
of us.
Well as to I wish I could report that in my opinion we stand high but we don't.
I don't suppose our prestige has been lower in Latin America at any time in the last 20
years than it has been during the last few years.
I think our policy has been very bad in Latin America.
I speak most respectfully and nonpartisanly but factually when I point out that the Latin
American program of the preceding administration is chief cause I think for the great slump
in Latin America and US relations.
We've got to stop US unilateral action toward Latin America.
We've got to adopt a program and present Kennedy's program now called Alliance Progress
will accomplish that end if it's implemented.
We've got to get our friends in Latin America to join with us in a cooperative Latin American
program.
And that means of course that the organization of American states which is based upon a treaty
signed by 21 nations including us has really got to be implemented.
And we've got to bring in our friends in Latin America to join with us in developing a
Latin American program on a cooperative basis.
And we've got to stop taking the attitude that we the United States are going to call
the tune in Latin America.
Well we're not going to do it even if we try.
Because if we continue to follow the policy we've been following in Cuba and no one
has opposed Castro more than I have.
I have led the fight in the Senate as chairman of the subcommittee in Latin America against
the Castro regime because I'm perfectly convinced that it's a comeline regime and that
Moscow is dictating a large measure the policies of Castro.
But that doesn't justify unilateral action on the part of the United States.
And so I am urging that we go through the organization of American states and work out
a cooperative program with them.
As you know Estes I was one of the two congressional delegates to the Bogota conference last September
that came back with the act of Bogota.
The act of Bogota is an aid program or proposes an aid program for Latin America with United
States help.
But not with full payment by the United States and I want to very quickly say we have said
very clearly and we must make it clear to Latin America.
It will help Latin America if Latin America is willing to help itself.
Now you say Mr. Senator what must Latin America do to get our help?
Well I want to name a few things very quickly.
You know the main past time in Latin America is tax evasion.
The Latin Americans are going to have to pay taxes.
They're going to have to raise money to help themselves.
They got to have a program of land reform, social justice reform.
That's the kind of a program that Senator the President Kennedy is supporting and that
I endorse.
Well I know that people who are viewing this program feel as I do that we're awfully sorry
that it has to be brought to an end.
It's been very fine of you to come and come down to Tennessee to see us soon and thank
you very much.
I'll be there very good on it.
Thank you.
That's all for now ladies and gentlemen.